we don't say that a a lion has to be
sent to the gas chambers it kills a
gazelle that's a step forward in our
general kind of moral development that
animals are not subjected to torture in
the way they were just a few years ago
now constraints on the torture will be
go experiment torture of at least
animals that are closer to us like
primates than there were 30 or 40 years
ago but I don't think anyone thinks that
animals have the rights and
responsibilities of human beings
what Noam Chomsky's had to say about
vegetarianism veganism and animal rights
has remained remarkably consistent for
many years
if you check around Google for a few
minutes you can find different videos
recorded at different periods of time of
him saying almost exactly the same thing
verbatim in an interview from 2010 you
acknowledge that there exists a moral
case for vegetarianism but at a recent
talk at University College London you
claim that animals cannot have the same
rights as humans because lacking reason
they cannot be considered to have
responsibilities with regard to rights
and responsibilities they do relate he
presents a very simple narrative about
the nature of Rights themselves claiming
that rights are based on
responsibilities and then proceeds to
offer a sort of anecdotal claim that the
rights of animals have improved
dramatically since about 40 years ago
because vivisection was much worse than
United States in the 1950s than it is
today
he often adds vague disclaimers about
the fact that he thinks that vivisection
testing on animals is bad that the
question of torturing animals or
is worth asking and he also often
vaguely states that he avoids eating
meat although he is not vegetarian or
vegan um so naturally the point of this
video is to tell you that Noam Chomsky
is completely right how could anyone
possibly disagree with there's an
opportunity cost of vegetarianism like
personally I'm not a vegetarian but the
main rule of almost never eat meat but
the reason is just a lot of time for
time to think about I don't I just pick
up whatever saves me time you know it's
funny he's normally being interviewed by
people who basically worship Him and yet
the people doing the interviews and the
people standing in the background and so
on when he's talking about animal rights
they often kind of look at him like just
tell nobody really finds this narrative
convincing or adequate the factual side
that I'm not really going to talk about
here is that anyone is a five-minute
Google search away from challenging the
rather vague claims that Chomsky makes
about tremendous progress in vivisection
in laws restricting animal testing but
above all else apart from the details
depending on where you're living you can
very quickly Google and see that you
know the indifference and ineffective
state of laws restricting vivisection
animals it is what it is but of all the
schools of thought whom you might expect
to be skeptical of probing of such
claims that the government can just
write a law wave its magic wand and
solve the problem
of all the schools of political theory
that would challenge that expectation
anarchism would be one of them and the
bizarre thing about Chomsky is that he
continues to identify as an anarchist
but there is absolutely nothing
sincerely anarchistic in his approach to
these facts now I just paused to clarify
here despite the appearance of my desk
and this t-shirt I'm not an anarchy
you don't even want to know what these
books are about man fewer books than
huge won't my desk right now cuz I just
finished an essay but I have more books
than usual on the floor it's a good sign
the concept that rights rests on
responsibilities that they are
reciprocal with that they depend upon
responsibilities that's a popular notion
in many schools of political science not
all it's by no means Universal or
default or unchallenged but among the
prominent well-known schools that
completely rejects that line of thought
is anarchism pure and simple I wonder
why there aren't sort of more anarchists
outraged at Chomsky for doing such a bad
job of representing them the belief that
the federal government United States or
any of the governments in Europe could
resolve such an ethically loaded
question as what happens to animals that
are the property of scientific
laboratories what happens to animals
that fall into the tender mercies of
research universities that claim to be
curing cancer claim to be promoting the
progress of science and use that as a
justification to torture monkeys to
death lab rats and what have you how
really would it be possible to convince
an anarchist if they were a sincere
anarchist that government regulation the
government legislation from the top down
would solve this problem I'm not an
anarchist I mentioned an earlier video
that I think of anarchism as a set of
theories that can answer some questions
and not others that can be a useful mode
of analysis or inquiry in some
circumstances and not others you know
anarchists are very good at complaining
when government regulation fails to
solve a problem and not so good at
actually coming up with constructive
solutions for say raising the level of
human rights for workers in garment
factories the first recourse people know
reach for is legislation legislation to
allow workers to unionize but also
legislation to actually send a
government inspector to visit the
factory to make sure that people have
access to bathrooms and drinking water
you can tell I used to live in the
tropics other people are not literally
chained to their desks government
regulation is the first resort and I
don't know a pure anarchist might say
well just allow the workers in the
factory to carry guns on their job every
day and let them sort it out that's an
extremely unpopular political philosophy
in the 21st century for some reason it
doesn't seem to convince many people
another approach to rights that is not
based on the notion of Rights being
reciprocal responsibilities is actually
the idea that rights like any other form
of legislation are based on avoiding
harm this may sound strange and familiar
to you if you stick with me for a minute
you'll you'll learn just how common it
is actually as an approach to rights and
legislation um
Chomsky's theory that all rights have to
derive from or correlate to
responsibilities supposedly invalidates
the concept of animal rights because
animals do not have responsibilities
animals are not responsible under the
law a wolf has no obligation to treat
you with kindness therefore you have no
obligation to treat the wolf with
kindness that idea can be found in Latin
written by Spinoza among other thinkers
and it may be from Spinoza that Chomsky
himself gets the idea Spinoza is a
philosopher in case you didn't know from
my disparaging tone of voice when I
mention its name reducing harm is a
different paradigm for why laws exist
for why rights exist and we don't create
these paradigms just to declare that
human rights are the most wonderful
thing in the world the purpose of a
rights based approach in political
science is ultimately to describe
reality to analyze reality and to come
up with policy recommendations
how we can improve reality so under the
harm based paradigm we then look at
something like do you have the right to
own a gun well in some parts of the
United States you have the almost
unlimited right to own a machine gun in
Canada you don't what is the
justification in either sense in both
places it's in terms of harm how do you
reduce harm but do I have the right to
buy and use cocaine or heroin both sides
of that argument the people who argue
that heroin should be illegal and the
people who argue that heroin should be
decriminalized or made legal both sides
pose their arguments in terms of harm
reduction what will do the least harm to
society what will allow individuals to
help themselves etc so actually the
notion that we establish rights like any
other set of legal principles in order
to reduce harm as a description of
reality is analysis how the world works
makes a lot of sense in terms of the
Western parliamentary tradition that in
Canada is mostly derived from England a
few other sources of influence all of
these approaches traditional
jurisprudence they work just okay when
we're talking about wild animals because
they're the principal issue is harm it's
pretty easy for the Western
parliamentary system to legislate and
regulate the interactions of human
beings with bears and lions do you have
the right to own a lion as late as the
1960s in England private citizens could
buy lions and tigers and other dangerous
cats and put them in the back yard of
their houses there was no legislation
preventing that and because of the
British Empire a few people did it
wasn't common over time accidents happen
new laws get passed but very obviously
the reasons why people are not allowed
to own lions and bears etc
has to do with harm and preventing harm
so our legal paradigms work okay in
those circumstances laws that prevent
you from going into a piece of land
that's specially reserved as a
wilderness preservation area for bears
laws that prevent you from hunting bears
etc those are pretty straightforward
those work okay the problem has been
that this harm based paradigm the the
basic assumptions of harm reduction were
not applied to and were difficult even
to conceptualize in relation to meat
production and owning animals in order
to exploit them how do we reduce harm
now the paradox for non vegans is that a
a harm reduction approach does not make
sense if you are killing and eating
animals at all for vegans things are
much simpler for vegans we would still
need those laws that govern bears and
tigers in the wild
we still need laws for wilderness
preservation and for what to do if a
bear actually climbs over your fence and
it's in your backyard I live in Canada
that does actually happen here
you know who's gonna fire the
tranquilizer dart and who's gonna pay
for a truck to carry the bear away and
put it back in the wilderness or what
have you
these are real questions we have to do
it these are also at normal rates
questions but the whole paradigm of
modern Western jurisprudence breaks down
and makes no sense at all when you're
talking about this is a real example
monkeys captured in the jungle along the
border between Vietnam and Cambodia put
on an airplane taken to England locked
into a laboratory and then tortured
until they die how do you reduce the
harm in that situation now the legal
questions surrounding that practice were
ultimately raised by airlines
because the airplanes that were being
given the task of transporting these
monkeys filmed it repugnant and then
once the airline started kicking up a
fuss then some people in the press
started kicking up a fuss British
Parliament sent an Committee of Inquiry
sent some people to go and visit the the
Vietnam Cambodia border where these
monkeys were being captured and
bizarrely what they decided again for
the reasons I've been outlining here was
that the legal change that had to happen
was that it was no longer acceptable to
torture monkeys to death in laboratories
if they were born in the wild because
then monkey wild monkeys
fell under this category of habitat
conservation of wilderness preservation
however if the monkeys were born in a
cage then they could be purchased as
property and tortured to death with
impunity etc the question of in praxis
how universities actually regulate
torturing animals to death usually I'm
here generalizing with the whole Western
world comes down to a committee system
which is you know the worst kind of
parody of democracy so within the
university they ask rounds on the
professor's a who's willing to sit on
the animal rights committee they may not
call it that they may call it the
research protocol committee or the the
ethics committee for animal research or
what-have-you
keep it vague the ethics committee
that'll do and whatever six different
professors get to put on their resume
that they spent a couple hours here and
they're sitting on an ethics committee
and pieces of paper are shown to them to
either approve or not approve and I do
not know of any example anywhere in the
world with this results in rigorous
evaluation of what is and what is not
necessary animal suffering I don't know
of any example the world with this works
to actually reduce harm to animals and
one round of court cases and Lee
decisions in Europe and so on after
another they just have to confess this
system doesn't work the Labour
government in England many years ago set
up a special committee not at the
university level but at the government
level that was supposed to review all
applications for vivisection for
torturing animals to death and a few
years later people evaluated and what do
you know it actually exists to promote
vivisection there's no evaluation of
what's necessary or unnecessary what
have you it doesn't it does not work in
the sense that it was a minute to work
now
so look what Noam Chomsky has to say on
this subject is in a word stupid and
ignorant and self-righteous that's about
four words they're not including and um
and as I say when you actually watch the
videos I don't think anyone in the room
with him when he's saying this stuff
finds it convincing or impressive nobody
even has the feeling that this guy has
looked into it has done a couple Google
searches to figure out how animal-rights
intersection of change over the last
bunch of years uh but this is
interesting because Chomsky is allegedly
an anarchist and this is actually an
example of a subject where the the whole
tradition the thousand year long
tradition of British law and
parliamentary decision-making legal
norms rights based rules were they break
down and become meaningless so if
there's one school of thought that
really should be able to tear into this
issue and have something meaningful to
say it's exactly the school of thought
that Noam Chomsky claims he represents
anarchism